[Music]
[Applause]
welcome to top cast episode 23 chapter
11 and the beginning of infinity the
multiverse this is the chapter that
personally I've been looking forward to
the most and we're going to approach it
a little bit differently background for
a start is a bit different this
episode's going to contain far less
reading from the beginning of infinity I
don't think this is necessarily crucial
for helping us to understand what's
happening in chapter 11 but it will just
help things along a little bit perhaps I
don't just want this chapter to blow
right by you as Sam Harris has said of
David deutsches way of explaining
certain powerful but subtle concepts
because once you have understood this
chapter it's one of the deepest
explanations of quantum theory that
exists out there anywhere whether in
popular science form or even proper
scientific text form so this chapter not
only tries to explain the new way of
understanding quantum theory which is
basically via the multiverse but also a
new way of understanding the multiverse
via David Deutsch and so we're really
looking at the very cutting-edge way of
trying to understand reality as
explained to us by quantum theory and
the very latest that David Deutsch has
published on this David's given talks
like the one titled you can look this up
online called apart from universes which
attempts to convey some of the other
perhaps more striking and surprising
things about the multiverse apart from
the multiple universes bit as well come
to see David's claim that this is
actually among the more mundane parts of
quantum theory will make sense when I
say mundane parts the fact that there
are multiple universes is really not the
most interesting part of the multiverse
theory there's a lot more to it so to my
mind this chapter really is a level up
from the typical explanations of quantum
theory and even a level up from the
typical explanations that you hear from
other science communicators and
physicists when they try and explain the
multiverse
and for this reason it's why I think we
need to take a little step back and
that's what I'm going to do here and now
in this episode also if you're listening
on audio this one contains a lot of
images videos and animations to help
things along in particular I'm going to
be trying to explain some experiments
three experiments in particular and
without the visuals one may really
struggle in places to understand what
I'm describing in certain points also if
you're interested it's essentially a
preamble to this episode and episode
zero if you like that was episode 22 of
taught cast it's in audio form only and
the purpose of that is in part to
provide some additional material to
support these episodes that I think
there'll be three of them one charge
leveled against the multiverse is that
it cannot be tested so it fails Papa's
criterion of falsifiability but that's
incorrect we'll be discussing that issue
throughout these episodes but if you
can't wait then episode 22 the audio
episode that's available and I'll give
some details there about the
falsifiability of the multiverse the
testability of the multiverse against
rival interpretations and in fact the
classical physics now there's a question
that David answers in the next chapter
chapter 12 for chapter 12 is a
physicists history of philosophy and
that's about why the quantum multiverse
as first explained by Hugh Everett back
in 1955 is still not taken seriously
today by a majority of physicists
although that does seem to be rapidly
changing right now the answer to the
riddle why don't all physicists agree
with the multiverse is basically bad
philosophy but most people watching or
listening to this will not be physicists
and so we've got a kind of a two-pronged
problem as I said on the one hand the
multiverse remains a minority opinion
among physicists and this might be a
cause for concern among some non
physicists if the supposed expert
consensus seems to be against the
multiverse among professionals in the
field
shouldn't I as a non physicist take that
as a bit of a red flag the answer is no
and the reason why as I alluded to will
be provided primarily in the next
chapter okay I'll have details on that
in the next chapter
suffice it for now to say that the
reason is bad philosophy and
we'll be covering some of that in these
next few episodes about the multiverse
to give a taste of what went wrong the
physicists were quite understandably
initially unable to comprehend what was
going on with a bunch of problematic
observations from various experiments in
the early 1900's that led to quantum
theory ultimately what was happening in
those experiments the observations that
they were making were so
counterintuitive and so many ideas were
floated to try and explain it that many
working quantum theorists simply gave up
even trying to understand it at all and
became what are known as
instrumentalists now an instrumentalist
is someone who regards a theory is
useful only in so far as it can predict
the outcome of experiments this has not
really happened before ever in the
history of science it will be rather
like when Niels Bohr who came up with
some of the early foundational parts of
atomic theory like for example his model
of the atom called the Bohr atom helps
to explain why the flames of certain
elements on the bone or certain
compounds at all when they burn have a
particular color so if you're looking at
fireworks and you see a green fire word
that's usually because of a copper atom
there somewhere rather burning it could
be a copper salt for example that's
burning copper salts tend to burn with a
green flame pure copper itself burns
with a green flame if you were to powder
up copper metal and set it on fire it
catches fire very readily it will burn
with a green flame now why green well
it's similar to why yellow when you're
burning wood wood contains carbon and it
burns with a yellow flame different
materials burn with different colored
flames of course most of us are only
familiar with wood burning and so we see
that characteristic yellow flame or
characteristic red flame in some cases
but every other element has its own
characteristic colored flame now why
well on Bohr's model of the atom the
reason why is because the electrons
orbit the nucleus at different energy
levels and as the electrons move up and
down those energy levels they can either
absorb photons of light or they can emit
photons of light and so if you have a
lot of heat then what's going on is the
electrons are being given additional
energy okay by the flame by the fire and
when they are
not up to a higher energy level because
now they've got higher energy due to
heat then they're unstable in that
particular position they want to be at
the most stable whole ground state and
so they tend to fall back down so
they're originally at a higher atomic
level a higher atomic energy level and
they fall back down to a lower atomic
energy level and in that process they
emit a photon that photon is
characteristic of the atom in which the
electron finds itself okay that'll make
sense so what's that got to do with
instrumentalism well at the time when
Bohr postulated all this no one could
see atoms at all there was no chance of
seeing atoms at that time there was no
such thing as a scanning tunneling
electron microscope which allows us to
see atoms no one could see atoms if
you're an instrumentalist what you would
have said at that time is that's an
interesting model Niels Bohr that you
have of the atom however I don't believe
in the existence of atoms because I
cannot see them and no one can see them
so we can use your model in order to
predict the colors of flames when
elements burn but we are not forced to
believe in the existence of atoms we the
best explanation is not that atoms exist
we don't need a best explanation that's
what not what science is about science
is merely about predicting the outcome
of experiments and so merely about
allowing us to say what color the flame
will be when you burn a particular atom
not that atoms actually exist
it's about telling us that when you burn
a particular substance like copper you
get a green flame and the reason why
according to atomic theory is because
the electrons are moving up and down but
you're not forced to actually believe in
the existence of atoms it's just a
useful mathematical model indeed at the
time there were some physicists the
chief among them was Ernst mark who said
at the time that he refused to believe
in the existence of entities which could
not in principle be sane and that was
the status of atoms at that time but as
David Deutsch has explained over and
again science is really about explaining
the scene the color of certain flames in
terms with the unseen the movement of
electrons around the nucleus of an atom
so we explained the green flame Bernie
and copper that we do see in terms of
electrons moving between orbitals around
an atomic nucleus which is a process
that we don't see this is absolutely key
to appreciate in science as a general
principle we explain the shining Sun
that
deucey in terms of the smashing together
of protons hydrogen nuclei in the core
of the Sun to form helium nuclei that we
don't see we've got no hope of seeing
that it's in the core of the Sun at
fifteen million Kelvin and nothing can
survive fifteen million Kelvin if it was
attempting to observe what was going on
at the core of the Sun we know the Big
Bang happened we explained observations
that we have of the cosmos for example
that there is heat leftover at a
temperature of 2.7 Kelvin above absolute
zero that permeates all of space we see
that we observe that and we observe the
so-called Hubble shift of galaxies all
the galaxies and all the galaxies many
of the galaxies out there are red
shifted away from us and appear to be
moving away from us and finally we see
that around about 75 percent of all the
atoms in the universe are hydrogen and
about 24% or something like that our
helium and this ratio is only explained
by the Big Bang so we see these things
the ratio of the elements we see the
movement of galaxies we see heat left
over in the universe but we do not see
the Big Bang we cannot see the Big Bang
we can't travel back in time to 13.7
billion years ago and see the big tanks
or explaining what we do see those three
things I mentioned the three pieces of
evidence in terms of the unseen the
actual occurrence of the Big Bang and of
course David's favorite example here is
dinosaurs and he has talked about this
in many different places what we see are
fossils rocks certain patterns in rocks
yeah they look like dinosaurs but only
in wrists in retrospect only once you
know that dinosaurs exist you never see
a dinosaur no one's ever seen a dinosaur
likely no one ever will see a dinosaur
what we see are rocks this is a rock
this is a series of rocks that people
have dug out of the ground and assembled
together and my gosh it looks like a
t-rex but it's not a t-rex it's not one
of these
[Music]
rocks are ossified bones they aren't
even dinosaur bones they're rocks
because over time the dinosaur bone
material itself has been replaced by
rocks it's a form of metamorphic rock we
don't see actual dinosaurs we explain
the scene what we can see the fossils in
terms of things we cannot see the
dinosaurs so one the unseen stuff is an
explanation of the other the same stuff
it's an interpretation and the denial of
the reality of dinosaurs by say some
hardcore creationists they might say
it's a test of our faith some
creationists of assertiveness is
irrational it's irrational because it's
far too easy to vary you can go all the
way back to episode 1 of this top caste
series all the way back to chapter 1 at
the beginning of infinity for more on
that so that's the philosophical context
within which we need to catch this whole
discussion of the multiverse the
explanation of our observations of
certain experiments in the field of
quantum physics I'm going to discuss
three experiments before getting to the
beginning of infinity at all just to set
the stage now the first one is known as
Millikan's experiment and it
demonstrates the photoelectric effect
and the photoelectric effect is about
how light can actually move particles
around and this is evidence that light
is not a wave it decides between two
models of light on the one hand the idea
that light is a wave and it cannot
possibly knock particles out of the way
it can only vibrate particles up and
down it can't knock them away and the
particle theory of light on the other
hand where the particles of light are
kind of like little billiard balls and
they can knock things out of the way
they can physically collide and that's a
good way of thinking about things that
particles can actually physically
collide and bounce off one another
whereas waves can go through one another
and if you've been to the beach you've
actually seen water way to do that now
the second experiment is known as the
mark Zehnder interferometer and in this
experiment we can't possibly explain the
outcome if you set up the experiment
just right
spend some time explaining that you
can't explain the outcome without
understanding that there must be two
photons in the apparatus even though you
only ever fire one which is astonishing
you fire one photon at the apparatus and
the only way to understand the result of
the experiment is by recourse to
postulating the existence of a second
equally real photon in fact what's going
on it's a little bit more complicated
than that
the one photon differentiates itself
into two groups of fungible photons
we're gonna have to unpack a lot of
quantum theory in order to understand
what I just said there but we'll get to
that the third experiment is Young's
twin slit experiment and this is the
experiment that was discussed in David's
first book chapter 2 shadows and so I'm
going to be doing a little bit of
reading from chapter two of the fabric
of reality okay before I get to those
three experiments I'll just have a
little personal reflection here indulge
me for a moment because though there are
many reasons today that people are
becoming more and more attracted to the
work of David dodge back in 1997 my own
reason and I think I speak for many
others was that I was struggling at
university to understand the basics of
quantum mechanics what I was presented
with in lectures as a physics
undergraduate was the mathematical
formalism we solved kind of puzzles or
did exercises in quantum mechanics
rather like doing you know high school
mathematics but unlike school maths
which was just about abstract numbers
lots of the time in quantum mechanics at
university the numbers are supposed to
represent parts of the physical world or
the symbols are supposed to represent
parts of the physical world how
particles and other things actually
behaved but it was near impossible to
understand as it was presented to me
what I was offered was instrumentalism
of the sort that I just mentioned before
you have these formulae and you have a
process whereby you predict the outcome
of the experiment but you're not really
supposed to ask what's going on during
the experiment the maths allows you to
simply predict the outcome of the
experiment and so it's a tool that's why
it's called instrumental
it's an instrument for predicting what
happens in the experiment but you don't
ask what actually is going on in the
experiment now if we didn't get
instrumental ISM maybe 5% of the other
time the lecture or the tutor would
mention something like wave particle
duality and in fact this is even what um
high school teachers today will do
they'll talk about wave particle duality
that a photon or an electron is
sometimes a particle and sometimes a
wave or simultaneously both a particle
and a wave at the same time now given
that a particle is something that's
isolated at one point in space and a
wave is something that spread out
through space
you can't simultaneously be isolated at
a point and spread out at the same time
this violates the law of the excluded
middle it violates logic but in fact
some people who teach quantum mechanics
will say well classical logic doesn't
apply and of course if you're going to
give up in classical logic you're really
giving up on reason altogether okay
you're entering into Wu Buland we must
obey the laws of logic otherwise we're
speaking nonsense whatever the case we
were reassured that if we're completely
confused that it was no cause for
concern really because very famous
physicists would say things like if you
think you understand quantum mechanics
you don't understand quantum mechanics
and this was supposed to be reassuring
but I was doing a physics degree back
then and I wanted to understand this
stuff a irrationality didn't sit well
with me it was one of the reasons I sort
of migrated into philosophy eventually I
was thinking how can something be
isolated a point not spread out in space
and sprayer and space all at the same
time I hated all that kind of talk now I
read some of Paul Davies books on
quantum mechanics he wrote the mind of
God he wrote various other books that
had a strong science component to them
and in particular quantum theory he was
often a bit of a mysterion he really
reveled in the mystery of quantum
mechanics which was interesting but I
wanted to solve the mystery I needed to
understand quantum theory but to pulled
out his credit in many of his books he
actually relied theories of many
different physicists and in particular
this is a fantastic one the ghost in the
atom and it's got interviews with lots
of different physicists and
the physicists that were interviewed
that he's interviewed in the book is
David Deutsch and in the interview he
explains the multiverse and explains how
its testable David was the first one to
come up with an experimental test for
the multiverse against rivals okay and
we're going to talk about that tests I
remember at the time when I did read
that book with the interview with David
I I was confused at first but I'm going
to explore what he does say as we move
through this series in particular about
how the multiverse is a testable theory
now it was sometime in around 1997 when
I picked up this book although not
exactly this one my original fabric of
reality a little paperback I lent to a
friend and it never came back so got
many other copies now that's the nice
hardcover book version and this book
I've mentioned before has an excellent
recommendation from Paul Davies on the
back and so seeing Paul Davies recommend
this book of course III picked it up
straight away and in that book in
chapter 2 shadows David explains the
multiverse perfectly clearly and it was
then that I was completely convinced I
finally felt that I understood who was
right about how to understand quantum a
theory it was the people on the side of
the multiverse it was the only one that
made sense we didn't have to give up
logic we didn't have to give up common
sense we didn't have to give up any
other part of science or rationality we
just had to accept the fact that the
universe that reality rather was much
much bigger than what anyone had thought
before and this wasn't particularly I
mean it was cool it was kind of really
interesting but it wasn't so shocking
that I was going to say no that's
ridiculous I can't possibly accept that
it made sense it was no more shocking to
me than I guess as a child learning
there are other planets out there beyond
the earth or later on learning that
there are other planets going around
other stars or that there are other
galaxies well now we know there are
other universes good this was no this
was cool but it wasn't
great shock to me but some people are
still shocked it's certainly amazing but
lots of stuff it's amazing it's amazing
that we're made of atoms
it's amazing the galaxies exist beyond
our own that the universe is as big as
it is that cells tiny as they are so
remarkably complicated that that all of
life on Earth apparently has been
extinguished almost completely around
about five times in the history of in
the history of the planet it's amazing
that the center of the earth is solid
iron but the outer core of the earth is
liquid iron and that generates a
magnetic field that protects us from the
Sun so I guess you know amazement is not
a reason to reject something it's a
reason to be really interested in it and
I don't find it any more amazing that
there are these parallel or almost
parallel universes out there than any of
those other things that I've just
mentioned and just amazing the amazing
parts of science but one reason to
reject a scientific theory is when it
violates logic and the other
interpretations of quantum theory do
exactly that they violate logic or
common sense and we'll talk about that
so we don't reject things because
they're amazing not in science or
anywhere else but we can reject things
if they violate common sense and
especially if they violate logic and a
lot of these things do vile a lot of
these alternatives do violate logic
logic for those with no respect for
logic very stupid person okay so that's
kind of right if you're trying very hard
to understand a thing
and the explanation you're getting isn't
working it's not necessarily all your
fault or at least not exclusively your
fault it can be very much the fault of
the explainer and that might be quite
right you know you could be proficient
at one part of a particular subject and
completely ignorant about another I
think it is a bit of a travesty that
quantum theorists professional
physicists don't all endorse the
multiverse
and again we'll come to that in the next
chapter I did make Paul Davies once back
in about the year 2003 in Sydney we were
coincidentally at a pub together for an
event called Science in the pub and the
debate raging onstage was between a
group of astronomers about the
definition of a planet a matter that
would be resolved about three years
later in 2006 but I wasn't really
interested in that matter as soon as I
saw Paul Davies I immediately asked
about as soon as I went up to him and
introduced to myself I asked him about
David Deutsch and the multiverse and
sadly place under the conversation was
and interesting as it was and excited as
otherwise to speak with him and I got
his autograph and we've discussed lots
of other things the response about the
multiverse was essentially I don't have
time to explain why it's not correct but
later I was able to read some more of
Paul's thinking and watch some more
interviews with him and he thought it
and this is the probably one of the most
common criticisms of the multiverse that
it violates Occam's razor so there's too
many things to explain the one thing
that we do observe but this
understanding of Occam's razor is in my
opinion completely fallacious Occam's
razor is not about increasing the number
of entities it's about increasing the
number of assumptions it would be like
saying we shouldn't postulate the
existence of other planets out there
that we cannot see just because we can
see some here in our solar system and in
out to a few hundred light years away
from the earth there are no reason to
think that the entire galaxy is filled
with planets let alone galaxies in the
rest of the universe that would violate
Occam's razor
we're proliferating the number of
planets beyond all reason well of course
we're not it's quite reasonable pursuit
to presume there are other planets out
there in the universe given what we've
already observed here in our solar
system and indeed in our local
neighborhood here in the galaxy so I
think it's completely wrong
when people talk about Occam's razor in
this way now even when some of
physicists are right about the
multiverse they can still kind of be
wrong I don't generally mention names
but
I've been called out by some people
watching these videos that I don't
mention names enough so I'll mention one
more name another person I respect
greatly Sean Carroll Sean Carroll
quantum physicist he's a supporter of
the many-worlds interpretation as well
he supports the multiverse
he gave a quite a good defense of it
recently on the Infinite Monkey cage
they had an episode if you haven't
listened to that podcast it's quite
entertaining Robyn hints and Professor
Brian Cox have that and they did one on
coincidentally the most recent one so
I'm recording this now in February of
2020 so if you're looking for some news
hence the Infinite Monkey cage in about
February 2020 was all about quantum
mechanics and in particular the
multiverse about Brian Cox and Sean
Carroll support the many-worlds
interpretation but I've heard Sean in
other situations give interviews about
the multiverse that he was on or both
Joe Rogan and Sam Harris and during
those interviews he insinuated that the
only problem with the multiverse is it's
not testable so so this is kind of
disappointing
he doesn't understand there's two tests
at least that I'm aware of of the
multiverse theory and we're going to get
to those and I regard as test of the
multiverse theory one that was discussed
in my previous episode about the fact
that that if you run an interference
experiment multiple times certain kinds
of interference experiment particularly
the double-slit interference experiment
for single particles you don't get the
same outcome each time you don't get the
same outcome each time because you're
finding yourself in a different universe
literally each time science should
produce the same results every single
time you run the experiment but this is
a case where you don't get the same
result every single time and that would
indicate that you're you're
approximating all the different
possibilities all the different
universes that could possibly exist this
is a test okay and I'll get to that
again later and and so the problem with
that Shawn's claim that the multiverse
isn't testable is he then thinks
simultaneously that
cause it's not testable he thinks that
this is a reason that falsification is
overrated
or a reason even that physics has moved
beyond falsification and I heard Sabine
HOF and static say the same thing online
recently as well a lot of physicists
have said this I should qualify that a
lot of theoretical physicists have been
saying this though that the pop Aryan
criterion of demarcation of
falsification is old hat we don't need
it anymore we've moved beyond it now so
in the case of Sean he endorses the
multiverse but for the wrong reasons in
part and Brian Cox he does endorse the
multiverse in some moods but with
hesitation it seems to me and hedges and
we'd sort of Dodgers in one of his
recent books I don't know that even uses
the term multiverse pay just claims that
about simultaneous realities occurring
the same time it's the same thing it's
the same concept it's like multiple
histories as well it's basically multi
multiple universes just with different
language being used okay so that's
enough here I'm just I guess emphasizing
how how difficult it is to find good
sources on the multiverse my own sources
here moving forward right now come down
to four of them okay there's four
sources I'm going to be using for these
firstly my own recollections and recent
survey the fundamentals in text books
and stuff um secondly Paul Davies book
ok so I'm actually going to be going to
this and what David says in this book
here in his interview with Paul Davies
David Wallace is my third source ok
excellent professor David Wallace
professor of philosopher of physics and
of course David Deutsch in the beginning
of infinity but not only beginning
infinity this time around but the fabric
of reality and substantially his paper
the structure of the multiverse as well
ok so let's move into the first of our
experiments and the first experiment is
the experiment that demonstrates that
light is in fact a particle ok so this
is a cartoon of the photoelectric effect
and we can see here where an
from physics education technology at the
University of Colorado so you can type
in pH et and you can find this online
and play with it you can see here we can
play with the intensity of the light
putting out some red light there and
over here what we've got is some metal
account on the left hand side there and
the metal is having red lights on it
nothing's happening nothing's happening
red light has a very long wavelength
it's got low energy the photons have low
energy and so even if you turn up the
intensity which means you're shining
more and more photons of light you're
throwing more and more photons there
nothing's happening nothing's happening
because none of the photons have enough
energy to knock the electrons out of the
way now if I reduce the wavelength I
increase the frequency increase the
energy there's a point at which look
electrons come out of that surface this
is called the photoelectric effect of
course you can do this in real life and
actually do the osh I've done this in
your life there's a video online of me
doing this in real life it shows how
there's this thing called the threshold
frequency so below the threshold
frequency no light gets emitted okay
around about there but if you increase
the frequency then you do get emission
of electrons the intensity never makes
any difference if you're below that
threshold frequency okay so that's the
photoelectric effect and so what's going
on there is if light was a wave if it
was truly a wave now that what I guess a
way to think about this is if you're a
you're a swimmer or a surfboard rider
and you're out beyond the breakers on
the ocean and then you're bobbing up and
down as the waves pass you're not being
you know you don't tend to be carried
one way or the other by the wave you
just move up and down you vibrate in
place you don't get carried corazon
talib i the wave you can't be knocked
out of position by the wave unless it's
breaking and then that case it it ceases
to be a wave and the normal way we think
about them waves also tend to pass
through one another as well they can
pass through matter just a sound can
vibrate through a window doesn't
necessarily it doesn't cause the window
to move now on the other hand
pickles can collide one with another and
they can knock each other out of the way
so if light is a wave then as it strikes
the surface of the metal here and it
could be cesium it could be sodium we
use active metals because they tend to
release electrons more easily then if
you've got low-energy light something
like red light then what should happen
is if you wait long enough then
electrons should come out because they
will slowly absorb the way of energy and
then electrons will come off the surface
but that's not what happens what you
need to do is to exceed a certain
frequency exceed a certain energy the
photons because on the particle theory
of light what's going on is a physical
collision and once you have enough
energy enough kinetic energy you can
physically knock the electron out of the
atom and that's really what's going on
here a physical collision between a
particle of light and a particle of
electricity namely the electron and you
can detect these electrons now you can
you can go to my youtube channel that
says I think this is one of the first
videos I ever made and this is an hour
long video not really recommending
anyone watch it unless you're really
came all about the photoelectric effect
experiment and so I take a bit of kit
the actual apparatus and go through it
go through shining light onto a cz a bit
of caesium metal that's hidden inside of
a black box so it's it's it's difficult
to see the full details but I do go
through it in excruciating detail all
the way down to calculating what
Planck's constant is by plotting a whole
bunch of data here so it's interesting
if you're a high school physics student
or physics undergraduate perhaps but
otherwise just know that it's there if
you really are curious about the
photoelectric effect it's there there's
an house worth of me talking about the
photoelectric effect okay so that's the
photo electric effect that shows that
light genuinely is a particle now this
is the MA
Zenda interferometer and it's available
at this website you can play with it
yourself so we're gonna try and
understand this I'm gonna take a few
minutes understand this what's going on
over here I can fire photons from a
laser or something one at a time and
they're going to hit something right
here that I'm indicating called a beam
splitter another word for a beam
splitter is a half-silvered mirror and a
half-silvered mirror is like you know
what other when you watch TV shows and
the detectives are interviewing the
criminal and the criminals in the room
locked up with an interrogator a single
interrogator and then behind the glass
behind one-way or two-way glass rather
all the other detectives watching what's
being said well that mirror that that's
a half-silvered mirror you can see
through in one direction but not in the
other direction so long as the room
where the interrogation is taking place
is lit very brightly and the people in
that room can't see the others that on
the other side of the mirror okay
so that's what that's what this thing
here is the beam splitter the beam
splitter is a half-silvered mirror and
you can make a beam splitter to send
through 10% of the light or 20% of light
or 50% of the line and this is what's
used in this experiment is a beam
splitter where for every photon that you
send through it's got a 50/50 chance of
either going through or being reflected
okay on the front of the beam splitter
is silver it's got metal they're highly
shiny reflecting material and so photons
can bounce off it but also on the back
there's glass okay some photons have
enough energy to go through some by
chance and some will will bounce off
okay all right so so firing a photon
will result in 50% going through the
half-silvered mirror and 50% bouncing
off the half silvered mirror
and then from there we've got two other
mirrors we've got marijuana's mirror -
and these are normal mirrors okay these
aren't half silvered or anything like do
so 100% of photons that hit here will go
this way to detect it too and the other
half will go to it Samira 1 & 3 detector
1 okay so if we fire a photon well we
don't know which way of scan you guys
are gonna go through he'll go through
here so let me just file and see what
happens
fire don't worry about the fact that
it's appearing to split in two just
notice that it set off detector two and
so in that case it appears the common
sense thing would be it's gone bang bang
and over here the photon apparently
hasn't gone that way apparently okay
let's do it again and see what happens
and it's being detected at detector 1
this time and we've got one one so we've
got a 50/50 okay well let's just
continuously fire and see if we maintain
a 50 because 50 50 would make sense
right if there's 50 percent going
through the beam splitter and 50%
bouncing off the beam splitter then we
should expect these numbers to roughly
approximate 50 50 a bit out of 50 50 at
the moment but if we continue to let it
run or we fast for let me fast forward
let's stop the continuous and let's do
100 all in one go and see what happens
okay we've got five and four out of nine
so that's close to 5050 if we got
exactly 50/50 that would be a bit
strange 55 54 out of 109 so that's a
pretty good 50% rate in detector 1 and
50% into the nectar so far makes perfect
sense
all right clear now I'm gonna take a
second half silvered mirror okay a
second beam splitter and put it there
now what do we expect happens well you
might expect okay well 50% go this way
bounce bounce bounce bounce
okay all through and 50 percent go this
way bounce bounce and could either go
that way or that way so a quarter of the
photons coming this way we'll end up at
detector one a quarter will end up at
the tick too and if the photons being
transmitted through this first Ben's
tada a quarter will end up a detector
one tick to do so we should still end up
with 50/50 it still looks symmetrical
doesn't it
let's see what happens let's fire one
and see what happens okay
detector to fire another one detector to
again continuous fire well would you
look at that it seems like detector ones
not being set off ever what the heck is
going on and if I stop the continuous
and we just 100 all in one go yes a
hundred percent go to detect it too
they're always and only ever going to
detect - why this animation gives some
clue it's showing that the mirror is
causing the photon that is coming out of
the laser or wherever - literally split
into two photons now technically
speaking we will build the cat right now
what's going on is that the photon is
not a single photon in a single universe
it's a multiversal object it's a photon
that exists in many uncountably infinite
probably universes and when it
encounters the half-silvered mirror it
splits into two fungible groups two
groups that are differentiated only by
the fact that one of them heads towards
marijuana and the other group heads
towards mirror - they both combine then
at beam splitter number two and that
results in them all going to detector -
now but why why should it be detected
two and not detector one couldn't it
just be a simply big detector one and
why isn't it 50% so just a point of
clarification or emphasis the
photoelectric effect tells us that
there's no such thing as half a photon
you don't get half photons so if you
were to place a detector before mirror
one or before mirror two and perform the
experiment you would find that only one
of the detectors ever went off only one
of the detectors would ever go off you
would only ever detect one photon this
demonstrates that the photon does not
split in half in our universe so when I
move forward in this explanation and
talk about the splitting of the photon
what I mean is the splitting of the
multiversal object which is called the
photon we exist in a multiverse and so
therefore when the photon encounters the
half-silvered mirror in half of the
universes it heads towards mirror one
and a half of the universes that heads
towards mirror two now you and your
detector are only in one universe so you
cannot possibly detect both
simultaneously both the part
simultaneously but the way that we
reason towards the existence of both
paths is the fact that the photon only
ever ends up in detector - so the
multiversal object that is the photon
does in fact take both paths you can
only ever detect one path but it is the
existence of both paths that explains
why the interference happens such that
the photon only ever goes and lights up
detector - okay so this is caused by
something known as the phase of the
electrons so phase has something to do
with wavelength but when we're thinking
about photons we Rick it really just
need to think of phases of quality of
the photon there's such a thing as
superposition so here's little animation
here I just googled and you can see you
can imagine these is two kind of water
waves that encounter one another when
the crest here coincides with a crest
there the addition of the two causes a
big crest there when you've got a cress
and a trough then they cancel each other
out this thick blue line is showing
what's called the resultant the net
effect of the two waves above adding
together so there's a point where you
get zero the two waves can add together
to give zero and so that's precisely
what's happening over here the two
photons that could travel towards
detector - sorry detector one cancel
each other out
they destructively interfere but the
photons that are heading towards
detector 2 constructively interfere why
should that be well if you know a little
bit of fizzy
reflections from mirrors caused a phase
change so if the photon that bounces off
here or it's originally kind of an up we
think of it as an up bit rather than as
a down bit okay so we've got troughs and
crests if the phase of that photon is up
as it comes out then it will be down as
it saw reflected off it changes from
being up to being down and then as it
reflects off this mirror again
reflection causes a phase change it goes
back to being up and so it's up as it
goes through here now the one that's
transmitted here in the other universe
as it goes through the beams through
here there's no phase change because of
no reflection there is a phase change
over here so if it was up coming out
here then it's down here the key to
understanding this and this is a very
subtle point to get into the technical
details is that the second beam splitter
here the reflection that can happen
there is different to the reflection
that can happen here here the metallic
side that reflects is encountered before
the glass so it's on the outside of the
glass so the reflection happens and you
get this phase shift at this point
however when a photon passes through
glass first and then hits the rear of
the beam splitter causing reflection up
to detector one the phase change is
different in in fact doesn't happen the
phase change doesn't happen there now
there are other complications with this
namely that as light in the form of
photons passes through glass it is
refracted refracted means bent and when
it's bent the optical path length the
distance that it travels is technically
further than what it is through air the
net consequence of all these factors the
fraction through the glass the fact that
one of the photons encounters the
silvered side first and the other photon
encounters the encounters the glass
first has the overall effect of causing
destructive interference the detector
one and constructive interference to
detect it too and so we end up with all
of the photons kind of detector to what
a nurse has got to do with the
multiverse remember we only fired one
photon here in order to explain why that
one photon always ends up a detector -
we have to invoke the existence of a
second photon traveling up to Mirror one
that combines with the photon in such a
way that it always ends up detected its
detector - and never it detector one we
have to postulate the existence of two
photons to explain what one photon is
doing the one photon splits into two
groups and then recombines into one it's
more profound than that the one photon
splits the universe into two and then
recombines the universes into one that's
what interference is interference is the
rare example of where differentiation
between universes in the multiverses
happen and then they're recombined
together again now if you're not
convinced by that don't worry we've got
a third experiment to talk about and I
think this really is the clincher was
certainly the clincher for me before I
if I leave here let's just talk about
this excellent paper here okay hopefully
can just see that on the screen how does
a mark Zehnder interferometer work by
Zekey atoms and TOC tell in teaching
physics so from the physics department
at westminster school it's excellent it
goes through a complete explanation not
in terms of the multiverse but if you're
interested in the algebra here and the
mathematics is what is going on it's a
very simple algebraic argument about the
physical makeup of those beam splitters
and how the phase of the light changes
the phase of the photon changes it's
very short it's only three pages with
some diagrams there but if you're
interested in the details of this if
you're an undergrad or if you're at
school trying to understand it so you
want to understand this great little
introduction there but not in terms of
the multiverse no one ever uses the
multi bus okay so now I'm gonna do some
readings from the fabric of reality to
try and really push this home this idea
that the universe is larger than we
think okay so this from the fabric of
reality chapter 2 page 39 and David
writes figure 2.6 should be up on the
screen now shows at roughly its actual
size a part of the pattern of shadows
cast three meters from a pair of
straight parallel slits in an otherwise
opaque barrier now what might that look
like
so that's what this looks like so the
experimental setup is like this we have
a source of photons we can find them one
at a time
and there's a barrier and the barrier
has just got to very narrow slits there
and behind on the screen we end up if we
fire enough of them over time we end up
with this thing called an interference
pattern and David's picture is a lot
clearer about what's going on there
the slits are 1/5 of a millimeter apart
and illuminated by a parallel sided beam
of pure red light from a laser on the
other side of the barrier Y laser light
not torch light only because the precise
shape of a shadow also depends on the
color of the light in which it is cast
white light as produced by torch
contains a mixture of all visible colors
so it can cast shadows with multicolored
fringes therefore in experiments about
the precise shapes of shadows we are
better off using light of a single color
we could put a colored filters such as a
pane of colored glass in the front of
the torch so that only lian have that
color would get through that would help
but filters are not all that
discriminating a better method is to use
laser light for lasers can be tuned very
accurately to emit light of whatever
color we choose with almost no other
color present so there we can see the
shadow cast by a barrier containing two
straight parallel slits
so this is the what you get if flight
traveled in perfectly straight lines the
pattern in Figure 2.6 will consist
simply of a pair of bright bands okay so
you didn't end up with just two of them
1/5 of a millimeter apart too close to
distinguish on this scale with sharp
edges and with the rest of the screening
shadow but in reality the light bends in
such a way as to make many bright bands
and dark bands and no sharp edges at all
if the slits move sideways so long as
they remain within the laser beam the
pattern also moves by the same amount in
this respect it behaves exactly like an
ordinary large-scale shadow now what
sort of shadow is cast if we cut a
second identical pair of slits in the
barrier interleave with the existing
pair so we have four slits 1/10 of a
millimeter apart you might expect the
patterns and look almost exactly like
2.6 afterall the first pair of slits by
itself cast a shadow in Figure 2.6 and
as I have just said the second pair by
itself would cast the same pattern shift
at about a tenth of a millimeter suicide
in almost the same place we even know
that light beams normally passed through
each other aren't affected so the two
pairs of slits together should give us
essentially the same pattern though
twice as bright and slightly more
blurred now for slit apparatus looking
would be something like that so here
we've got four slits and then we say
bright bits and dark bits okay they're
the shadows and these the bright bits if
you actually do any experiments what you
see say increase the number of slits and
you see this sort of so just to hammer
this point home if you've got one slit
you get this big long diffraction
pattern okay lots and lots of light with
one slip if you increase the number of
slits in other words increase the number
of places through which light can come
you seem to increase the number of
shadows right that's rather weird and
more shadows here less light more slits
less light compared to one slit that's
phenomenal isn't it okay well David's
going to explain that so let's keep
going
back to fabric of reality the real
shadow of a barrier with four straight
parallel slits is shown in Figure two
point seven a okay so over here in two
point seven a we've got a picture of
these two things
picture a that's the the four slit one
and B is two slits so David writes in
fabric of reality the four slit shadow
is not a combination of two slight
displaced two slits shadows but has a
new and more complicated pattern in this
pattern there are places such as the
point marked X which are dark on the
four slit pattern but bright on the
two-slit pattern these places were
bright where there were two slits in the
barrier but went dark when we cut a
second pair of slits but alike to pass
through opening those slits is
interfered with the life that was
previously arriving at X so adding two
more light sources darkens the pointed X
removing them illuminates it again how
one might imagine two photons heading
towards X and bouncing off each other
like billiard balls either photon alone
would have hit X but the two together
interfere with each other so that they
both end up elsewhere I shall show in a
moment that this explanation cannot be
true nevertheless the basic idea of it
is inescapable something must be coming
through that second pair of states to
prevent the light from the first pair
from reaching X but what we can find out
what the help with some further
experiments first the four slit pattern
of figure two point seven a appears only
of all four slits are illuminated by the
laser beam if only two of them are
illuminated a two-slit pattern appears
if three are illuminated a three slit
pattern appears which looks different
again so whatever causes the
interference is in the beam the two slit
pattern also reappears if the two if two
of the slits are filled by anything I
pack but not if they are filled by
anything transparent in other words the
interfering entity is obstructed by
anything that obstructs light even
something as insubstantial as fog but it
can penetrate anything that allows light
to pass even something is impenetrable
to matter as diamund if complicated
systems of mirrors and lenses are placed
anywhere in the upper artists so long as
light can travel from each slit to a
particular point on the screen what will
be observed at that point will be part
of the four slit pattern if light from
le two slits can reach a particular
point part of a two slit pattern will be
observed there and so on so whatever
causes interference behaves like light
it has found everywhere in the light
beam and nowhere outside it it is
reflected transmitted or blocked by
whatever reflects transmits or blocks
light you may be wondering why I'm
laboring this point surely it is obvious
that it is like that what interferes
with photons from each slit is photons
from the other slits but you may be
inclined to doubt the obvious after the
next experiment
d-dad movement of the series what should
we expect to happen when these
experiments are performed with only one
photon at a time for instance suppose
that our torches move so far away that
only one photon per day is falling on
the screen what would be seen if it is
true that what interferes with each
photon is other photons then shouldn't
the interference be lessened when there
when the photons are very sparse should
it not cease altogether when there is
only one photon passing through the
apparatus at any one time we might still
expect penumbra's since a photon might
be capable of changing course when
passing through a slip
perhaps by striking a glancing blow at
the edge but what we surely could not
observe is any place on the screen such
as X that receives photons when two
slits are open but which goes dark when
two more are opened yet that's exactly
what we do observe however sparse the
photons are the shadow pattern remains
the same even when the experiment is
done with one photon at a time none of
them has ever observed to arrive at X
when all four slits are open yet we need
only closed two slits for the flickering
8x to resume could it be that the photon
splits into fragments which after
passing through the slits change course
and recombine we can rule that
possibility out too if again we fire one
photon through the upper artist but use
four detectors one at each slit then at
most one of them ever registers anything
since in such an experiment we never
observe two of the defectors ever going
off at once we can tell that the entity
is that they detect are not splitting up
so if the photons do not split into
fragments and are not being deflected by
other photons
what does deflect them when a single
photon at a time is passing through the
upper artists what can be coming through
the other slits to interview with it let
us take stock we have found that when
one photon passes through this apparatus
it passes through one of the slits and
then something in
fears with it deflecting it in a way
that depends on what other slits are
open the interfering entities have
passed through some of the other slits
the interfering entities behave exactly
like photons except they cannot be seen
I shall now start calling the
interfering entities photons that is
what they are though for the moment it
does appear that photons come in two
sorts which I shall temporarily call
tangible photons and Shadow photons
tangible photons are the ones we can see
or detect with instruments whereas the
shadow photons are intangible they're
invisible detectable only through their
interference effects on the tangible
photons later we shall see that there is
no intrinsic difference between a
tangible and strata shadow photons each
photon is tangible in one universe in
intangible and all the other parallel
universes but I anticipate what we've
inferred so far is only that each
tangible photon has an accompanying
retinue of shadow photons and that when
a photon passes through one of our four
slits some shadow photons pass through
the other three slits since different
interference patterns appear when we cut
slits at other places in the screen
provided that they are within the beam
shadow photons must be arriving all over
the illuminated part of the screen
whenever a tangible photon arrives
therefore there are many more shadow
photons and tangible ones
how many experiments cannot put an upper
bound on the number but they do set a
rough lower bound in a laboratory the
largest area that we could conveniently
illuminate with a laser light might be
about a square meter and the smallest
manageable size of the holes might be
about a thousandth of a millimeter so
there are about ten to the power of
twelve a trillion possible hole
locations on the screen therefore there
must be at least a trillion shadow
photons accompanying each tangible one
thus we have inferred the existence of a
seething prodigiously complicated hidden
world of shadow photons that travel at
the speed of light bounce off mirrors or
refracted by lenses and are stopped by
opaque barriers or filters of the wrong
color yet they do not trigger even the
most sensitive detectors the only thing
in the universe that a shadow photon can
be observed to affect is the tangible
photon that it accompanies this is the
phenomenon of interference shadow
photons would go into highly unnoticed
were it not for this phenomenon and the
strange and the
strange patterns of shadows by which we
observe it interference is not a special
property of photons alone quantum theory
predicts an experiment confirms that it
occurs for every sort of particle so
there must be hosts of shadow neutrons
accompanying every tangible neutrons
hosts of shadow electrons accompanying
every tangible electron and so on each
of each of these shadow particles are
detectable only indirectly through its
interference with the motion of its
tangible counterpart it follows that
reality is much bigger than it seems and
most of it is invisible the objects and
events that we na instruments can
directly observer the merest tip of the
iceberg now tangible particles have a
property that in a Buhl's us to call
them collectively a universe this is
simply their defining property of being
tangible that is of interacting with
each other and hence of being directly
detectable by instruments and sense
organs made by other tangible particles
because of the phenomenon of
interference they are not wholly
partitioned off from the rest of reality
that is from the shadow particles if
they were we should never have
discovered there is more to reality than
tangible particles but to a good
approximation they do resemble the
universe that we see around us in
everyday life and the universe referred
to in classical or pre-contact quantum
physics for similar reasons we might
think of calling the shadow particles
collectively a parallel universe for
they too are affected by tangible
particles only through interference
phenomena but we can do better than that
for it turns out that shadow particles
are petitioned among themselves in
exactly the same way as the universe of
tangible particles is partitioned from
them in other words they do not form a
single homogeneous parallel universe
vastly larger than a tangible one but
rather a huge number of parallel
universes each similar in composition to
the tangible one and each of buying the
same laws of physics but differing in
that the particles are in different
positions in each universe a remark
about terminology the word universe has
traditionally been used to mean the
whole of physical reality in that sense
there can be at most one universe we
could stick to that definition and say
that the entity we have been accustomed
to calling the universe namely all the
directly perceptible matter and energy
around us and the surrounding space is
not the whole universe after all but
only a small portion of it then we
should have to invent a new name for
that small tangible portion but most
physicists prefer to carry on using the
word universe to denote the same entity
that has
that it has always denoted even though
that entity now turns out to be only a
small part of physical reality a new
word multiverse has been coined to
denote physical reality as a whole
single particle interference experiments
such as I have been describing show us
that the multiverse exists and it
contains many counterparts of each
particle in the tangible universe to
reach the further conclusion that the
multiverse is roughly partitioned into
parallel universes we must consider
interference phenomena involving more
than one tangible particle the simplify
of doing this is to ask by way a thought
experiment what must be happening at the
macroscopic level when shadow photons
strike an opaque object they are stopped
of course we know that because
interference ceases when the pake
barriers placed in the paths of shadow
photons but why what stops them we can
rule out the straightforward answer that
they are absorbed like tangible photons
would be okay and then David goes on to
say well they're absorbed these tangible
photons are absorbed by tangible
barriers but it means that also the
shadow photons are absorbed by shadow
barriers and the shadow barriers exist
inside shadow laboratories and the
shadow laboratories are in a shadow
world and so on and so this is the this
is the emergent multiverse idea okay so
there are three experiments there's some
personal motivation and a hint about the
multiverse we still haven't got to
reading a chapter 11 of the multiverse
but that will happen next time and we'll
look in some detail at the further
experiment okay it's more of a thought
experiment but potentially could be
really done an experiment to refute
other ways of understanding quantum
theory or trying to understand quantum
theory namely so-called collapse
interpretations or the Copenhagen
interpretation to refute those without
refuting the multiverse theory there is
a test there is a test that David came
up with and so we'll talk about that
next time but for now this has been
million hours worth of quantum theory
until next time bye if you're finding my
videos
podcasts or even my website valuable
there's a way to contribute now so that
I can spend more time doing this if you
go to my website
www.marykay.co.uk/awilliam visit
[Music]